The northern lights, or the aurora borealis, are beautiful dancing ribbons of light that have captivated people for millennia. But for all its beauty, this spectacular light show is a rather violent event. The northern lights are created when energized particles from the sun slam into Earth's upper atmosphere at speeds of up to 45 million mph (72 million kph), but our planet's magnetic field protects us from the onslaught. As Earth's magnetic field redirects the particles toward the poles — there are southern lights, too, which you can read about below — the dramatic process transforms into a cinematic atmospheric phenomenon that dazzles and fascinates scientists and skywatchers alike. At any given moment, the sun is ejecting charged particles from its corona, or upper atmosphere, creating the solar wind. When that wind slams into Earth's ionosphere, or upper atmosphere, the aurora is born. In the Northern Hemisphere, the phenomenon is called the northern lights (aurora borealis), while in the Southern Hemisphere, it's called the southern lights (aurora australis). "These particles are deflected towards the poles of Earth by our planet's magnetic field and interact with our atmosphere, depositing energy and causing the atmosphere to fluoresce," Billy Teets, the director of Dyer Observatory at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, Tennessee told. The bright colors of the northern lights are dictated by the chemical composition of Earth's atmosphere. "Every type of atom or molecule, whether it's atomic hydrogen or a molecule like carbon dioxide, absorbs and radiates its own unique set of colors, which is analogous to how every human being has a unique set of fingerprints," Teets told. "Some of the dominant colors seen in aurorae are red, a hue produced by the nitrogen molecules, and green, which is produced by oxygen molecules". Teet continued. What causes the movement and shape of auroras? Constantly changing input from the sun, varying responses from the Earth's upper atmosphere, and the motion of the planet and particles in near-Earth space all conspired to cause different auroral motions and shapes. From these motions and shapes, we can learn about the physics happening further out in space along the Earth's magnetic field lines. What do auroras tell us about Earth's atmosphere? Auroras tell us many things about Earth's upper atmosphere, including its density, composition, flow speeds, and the strength of electrical currents flowing in the upper atmosphere. These in turn tell us about the Earth's magnetic field, how it extends into space, and how it changes dynamically. All of this is important for protecting Earth and space-borne technologies from hazards of "space weather" of which aurora is one part. Do we have auroras on other planets? Yes! Aurora indicates planets with magnetic fields and atmospheres, which vary a lot compared to Earth. While solar wind is constant, the sun's emissions go through a roughly 11-year cycle of activity. Sometimes there's a lull, but other times, there are vast storms that bombard Earth with extreme amounts of energy. This is when the northern lights are at their brightest and most frequent. Lucky for aurora hunters, we are currently approaching solar maximum which is predicted to peak between early 2024 to late 2025. Scientists cannot pinpoint exactly when solar maximum will occur but we do know it's on its way. "Currently for solar cycle 25, by synthesizing all published predictions, the time interval for the cycle maximum ranges from late 2023 to early 2025" Frédéric Clette, solar physicist, World Data Center Sunspot Index and Long-term Solar Observations (SILSO) and Solar Influence Data analysis Center (SIDC) told in an email. NOAA's Space Weather Prediction Center (SWPC) recently issued a revised prediction that suggests solar maximum may occur between January and October 2024. If you're planning an aurora hunting trip now is the time as "the next few years will be the most favorable for auroral sightings," Clette continued. Seeing the northern lights with your own eyes is a bucket-list item for astronomy lovers and travelers alike. Fortunately, they occur frequently. "The northern lights are happening 24 hours a day, seven days a week, 365 days a year," said photographer Chad Blakely, owner of the northern lights tour company Lights Over Lapland. But that doesn't mean they're easy to spot; you need to be at the right place at the right time. Related: Northern lights webcams: Watch the aurora borealis online for freeThe best place to see the northern lights is any destination in the "auroral zone," the area within an approximately 1,550-mile (2,500 kilometers) radius of the North Pole, according to the Tromsø Geophysical Observatory in Norway. That's where the aurora most frequently occurs, though the phenomenon can creep farther south during particularly strong solar storms. If planning a trip to see the northern lights, we recommend Hurtigruten's Astronomy Voyage which combines northern lights viewing, astronomy lectures and the beautiful Norwegian coastline. You can read all about what it's like onboard in our article "What it's like to chase the northern lights along Norway's dramatic coastline". Within the auroral zone, it's best to be as far away from city lights as possible to maximize visibility. But it's pretty tricky to get into the middle of the Arctic wilderness, even with a guide, so it's best to base yourself in a destination with solid infrastructure, like Fairbanks, Alaska; Yellowknife, Canada; Tromsø, Norway; Abisko National Park, in Sweden; Rovaniemi, Finland; and pretty much anywhere in Iceland. The best time of year to see the northern lights is between September and April, when the sky gets dark enough to see the aurora. (Far northern locales experience the midnight sun, or 24 hours of daylight in the summer). The most action usually happens between 9 p. m. and 3 a. m. , according to the Geophysical Institute of the University of Alaska Fairbanks. Check local weather forecasts as well, because you won't be able to spot the aurora through the clouds. You can also monitor aurora forecasts from the University of Alaska Fairbanks' Geophysical Institute and NOAA, which offers both three-day and 30-minute forecasts. On Earth, the northern lights' counterpart in the Southern Hemisphere is the southern lights — they are physically the same and differ only in their location. As such, scientists expect them to occur simultaneously during a solar storm, but sometimes the onset of one lags behind the other". One of the more challenging aspects of nightside aurorae involves the comparison of the aurora borealis with the aurora australis," said Steven Petrinec, a physicist at the aerospace company Lockheed Martin who specializes in magnetospheric and heliospheric physics told. "While some auroral emissions occur in both hemispheres at the same magnetic local time, other emissions appear in opposing sectors in the two hemispheres at different times — for example, pre-midnight in the Northern Hemisphere and post-midnight in the Southern Hemisphere," Petrinec told. The hemispheric asymmetry of the aurora is due in part to the sun's magnetic field interfering with Earth's magnetic field, but research into the phenomenon is ongoing. Another aurora-like occurrence on Earth is STEVE ("Strong Thermal Emission Velocity Enhancement"). Like the northern and southern lights, STEVE is a glowing atmospheric phenomenon, but it looks slightly different from its undulating auroral counterparts. "These emissions appear as a narrow and distinct arc, are typically purple in color and often include a green picket-fence structure that slowly moves westward," Petrinec said. STEVE is also visible from lower latitudes, closer to the equator, than the auroras. A 2019 study published in the journal Geophysical Research Letters discovered that STEVE is the result of two mechanisms: The mauve streaks are caused by the heating of charged particles in the upper atmosphere, while the picket-fence structure results from electrons falling into the atmosphere. The latter process is the same driver of the aurora, making STEVE a special kind of aurora hybrid. Auroras occur on other planets, too — all that's required to make an aurora is an atmosphere and a magnetic field. "Auroras have been seen in the atmospheres of all the gas giant planets, which is not surprising, since these planets all have robust magnetic fields," said Jeff Regester, an instructor of physics and astronomy at High Point University in North Carolina. "More surprisingly, auroras have also been discovered on both Venus and Mars, both of which have very weak magnetic fields". Indeed, scientists have cataloged three different types of Martian auroras. One occurs only on the planet's dayside, another is a widespread nighttime feature fueled by strong solar storms and another is a much patchier nightside phenomenon. The Hope Mars orbiter, the United Arab Emirates' first-ever interplanetary mission, managed to capture the discrete nocturnal aurora shortly after arriving at the Red Planet in early 2021. The probe's observations could help scientists better understand this mysterious phenomenon.Jupiter's magnetic field is 20,000 times stronger than that of Earth, so the giant planet's auroras are far brighter than the ones that blaze in our skies. And the Jupiter lights aren't just driven by the solar wind: Most of the particles that cause the planet's auroras are blasted into space by its close-orbiting moon Io, the most volcanic body in the solar system. Astronomers have even caught glimpses of apparent auroral activity in other solar systems. For example, two October 2021 studies reported the detection of radio waves emitted by multiple red dwarfs, stars smaller and dimmer than our own sun. These radio waves are likely associated with a sort of "backward" aurora, one that flares up near stars and is driven by particles released by close-orbiting planets, researchers said. "Our model for this radio emission from our stars is a scaled-up version of Jupiter and Io, with a planet enveloped in the magnetic field of a star, feeding material into vast currents that similarly power bright aurorae," Joseph Callingham, a radio astronomer at Leiden University in the Netherlands and the Dutch national observatory ASTRON and co-author on both new studies, said in a statement. "It's a spectacle that has attracted our attention from light-years away". These feeder planets remain hypothetical at the moment; nobody has yet discovered any circling the red dwarfs that the team studied. But if Callingham and his colleagues are right, astronomers may have a powerful new planet-hunting technique at their disposal. Auroras are expected to be relatively common in the skies of exoplanets as well. But we'll have to get better looks at these faraway worlds to see their light shows directly.